README.md, before:

<p style="text-align:center;" align="center">
  <img src="resources/logo.png" width="200"/></a>
</p>

<h4 align="center">Kubernetes operator for the <a href="https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant" target="_blank">Qdrant</a> Vector Database.</h4>

<p align="center">
  <a href="#-key-features">Key Features</a> •
  <a href="#-installation">Installation</a> •
  <a href="#-quickstart">Quickstart</a> •
  <a href="#-security">Security</a> •
  <a href="#-backups">Backups</a> •
  <a href="#-documentation">Documentation</a> •
  <a href="#-demo-application">Demo application</a>
</p>

![screenshot](resources/qdrant-operator.gif)

## 🎯 Key features

The operator provides the following functionality:

- Creation of single-node and multi-node Qdrant clusters, cluster scaling.
- Authentication support in the cluster using API keys with read-write and read-only permissions. Auto-generated and user-provided keys are supported.
- TLS Encryption support for connections, both for client and peer-to-peer communication. Auto-generated and user-provided certificates are supported.
- Support for setting custom Qdrant parameters.
- Support for setting various scheduling options for the cluster (tolerations, affinities, topology spread).
- Management of Qdrant collections, including configuration of replication, sharding, indexing, quantization, etc.
- The operator works in cluster mode with leader elections, ensuring high availability.
- The operator allows to create instant and scheduled snapshots and store them in any S3-compatible storage.

### 🔨 Installation

To run the operator you need Kubernetes version 1.26+.

The operator includes two custom resources - `QdrantCluster` and `QdrantCollection`. Install the CRDs by running the commands below:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/main/deploy/crds/crd-qdrantcluster.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/main/deploy/crds/crd-qdrantcollection.yaml
```

You will see the next output:

```console
customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/qdrantclusters.qdrant.operator created
customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/qdrantcollections.qdrant.operator created
```

Install the operator by running the command below:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/main/deploy/operator.yaml
```

```console
namespace/qdrant-operator created
serviceaccount/qdrant-operator-sa created
clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/qdrant-operator-role created
clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/qdrant-operator-rolebinding created
configmap/qdrant-operator-config created
deployment.apps/qdrant-operator created
```

Wait for operator's readiness:

```bash
kubectl wait pods -l app=qdrant-operator --for condition=Ready --timeout=300s -n qdrant-operator
```

And check operator's logs to ensure it is working:

```bash
kubectl logs deploy/qdrant-operator -n qdrant-operator
```

```console
Found 3 pods, using pod/qdrant-operator-6577f85799-ggkgm
1/14/2024, 3:58:40 PM: Debug mode ON!
1/14/2024, 3:58:40 PM: Status of "qdrant-operator-6577f85799-ggkgm": FOLLOWER. Trying to get leader status...
1/14/2024, 3:58:41 PM: Status of "qdrant-operator-6577f85799-ggkgm": LEADER.
1/14/2024, 3:58:41 PM: Watching QdrantClusters API.
1/14/2024, 3:58:41 PM: Watching QdrantCollections API.
```

### ⚡ Quickstart

Deploy your first Qdrant cluster by applying the minimal QdrantCluster custom resource:

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCluster
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 1
  image: qdrant/qdrant:v1.16.3
EOF
```

```console
qdrantcluster.qdrant.operator/my-cluster created
```

Check operator's logs to ensure cluster is running now:

```console
1/14/2024, 3:59:24 PM: Received event in phase ADDED.
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: The cluster "my-cluster" status now is Pending.
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: ConfigMap "my-cluster" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: ConfigMap "my-cluster" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: Service "my-cluster-headless" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: Service "my-cluster-headless" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: Service "my-cluster" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: Service "my-cluster" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: StatefulSet "my-cluster" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: StatefulSet "my-cluster" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:31 PM: Cluster "my-cluster" is not ready: 0/1 are available.
1/14/2024, 3:59:36 PM: Cluster "my-cluster" is not ready: 0/1 are available.
1/14/2024, 3:59:41 PM: Cluster "my-cluster" is ready!
1/14/2024, 3:59:41 PM: The cluster "my-cluster" status now is Running.
```

There are two mandatory parameters - `replicas` and `image`. You can check minimal and complete YAML manifests in the [examples](examples) folder.

By default there are no replication, resources, data persistence and scheduling options configured.

Now create your first vector [collection](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/concepts/collections/):

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCollection
metadata:
  name: my-collection
spec:
  cluster: my-cluster
  vectorSize: 10
EOF
```

```console
qdrantcollection.qdrant.operator/my-collection created
```

Check logs:

```console
1/14/2024, 4:01:43 PM: Received event in phase ADDED.
1/14/2024, 4:01:43 PM: Trying to create a Collection "my-collection" in the Cluster "my-cluster"...
1/14/2024, 4:01:44 PM: Status: ""ok"", time: "0.311443".
```

There are two mandatory parameters - `cluster` with the cluster reference and `vectorSize`. Minimal and complete manifests are also stored in the [examples](examples) folder.

By default disk storage is not configured and will use global cluster parameters, and shards number and replication factor are configured to `1` both.

### 🔒 Security

You can enable traffic encryption for client connections and between Qdrant nodes using the `spec.tls.enabled` option.
You can provide your own certificates (`spec.tls.secretName`) or use those generated by the operator.

```yaml
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCluster
...
spec:
  ...
  tls:
    enabled: true
    # secretName: your-certs-secret
```

Authentication is supported using API keys and read-only API keys. The parameters can be 'false', 'true' (operator generates keys), or 'your-own-custom-key'.

```yaml
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCluster
---
spec:
  apikey: 'true'
  readApikey: 'readoperationskey123'
```

### 💾 Backups

The operator allows you to create instant and scheduled snapshots of collections, storing data in S3 buckets (various cloud providers are supported).
Use the `spec.snapshots` option.

```yaml
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCollection
...
spec:
  ...
  snapshots:
    s3EndpointURL: https://storage.googleapis.com/
    # s3EndpointURL: https://s3.amazonaws.com
    s3CredentialsSecretName: your-credentials-secret
    bucketName: your-bucket-for-snapshots
    # backupNow: true
    backupSchedule: "0 0 * * *"
    # restoreSnapshotName: clustername/collectionname/2024-01-01-23-59
```

Ensure to replace placeholders `your-credentials-secret` and `your-bucket-for-snapshots` with your actual secret name and bucket name.

### 🤖 Demo application

![demo](resources/demo2.gif)

Check the [demo-app](demo-app/README.md) folder to see a simple demo application that allows you to upload PDF documents to Qdrant and answer questions about the contents of the file.
The demo application does not rely on paid APIs from well-known services (such as Google Vertex AI or OpenAI).

### 📖 Documentation

Guides:

- [TLS usage](docs/tls.md)
- [Authentication](docs/authentication.md)
- [Cluster architecture](docs/architecture.md)
- [QdrantClusters API reference](docs/qdrantclusters-api.md)
- [QdrantCollections API reference](docs/qdrantcollections-api.md)
- [Backup and Restore](docs/backup-restore.md)

YAML examples:

- [Minimal Qdrant cluster](examples/qdrant-cluster-minimal.yaml)
- [Qdrant cluster with authentication](examples/qdrant-cluster-apikey.yaml)
- [Qdrant cluster with TLS](examples/qdrant-cluster-tls.yaml)
- [Complete Qdrant cluster](examples/qdrant-cluster-complete.yaml)
- [Minimal Qdrant collection](examples/qdrant-collection-minimal.yaml)
- [Qdrant collection with replication](examples/qdrant-collection-replication.yaml)
- [Qdrant collection with snapshots](examples/qdrant-collection-snapshot.yaml)
- [Complete Qdrant collection](examples/qdrant-collection-complete.yaml)

### ⭐ Give a Star!

Do you like this project? Support it by **giving a star**!

### ❓ Help and contribution.

If you encounter any issues while using Qdrant-operator, you can get help using [Github issues](https://github.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/issues).
If you want to help out with a code contribution, check the [Contribution guideline](./CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT](./LICENSE) license.

## Disclaimer of Warranty

Please note that the Qdrant operator currently is under development and new releases might contain bugs and breaking changes. The operator is not affiliated with [Qdrant](https://github.com/qdrant/).

This is based on https://github.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator which was no longer updated

Commit message:

feat: enhance operator functionality with volume snapshots and network policies
- Introduced support for Kubernetes VolumeSnapshots, allowing for scheduled and on-demand backups of persistent volumes.
- Added a CronJob for automated volume snapshot creation based on user-defined schedules and retention policies.
- Implemented a NetworkPolicy for cluster isolation, enhancing security by controlling traffic to and from Qdrant pods.
- Updated documentation to reflect new features and provide guidance on usage and configuration.

README.md, after:

<p style="text-align:center;" align="center">
  <img src="resources/logo.png" width="200"/></a>
</p>

<h4 align="center">Kubernetes operator for the <a href="https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant" target="_blank">Qdrant</a> Vector Database.</h4>

<p align="center">
  <a href="#-key-features">Key Features</a> •
  <a href="#-installation">Installation</a> •
  <a href="#-quickstart">Quickstart</a> •
  <a href="#-security">Security</a> •
  <a href="#-backups">Backups</a> •
  <a href="#-documentation">Documentation</a> •
  <a href="#-demo-application">Demo application</a>
</p>

![screenshot](resources/qdrant-operator.gif)

## 🎯 Key features

The operator provides the following functionality:

- Creation of single-node and multi-node Qdrant clusters, cluster scaling.
- Authentication support in the cluster using API keys with read-write and read-only permissions. Auto-generated and user-provided keys are supported.
- TLS Encryption support for connections, both for client and peer-to-peer communication. Auto-generated and user-provided certificates are supported.
- Support for setting custom Qdrant parameters.
- Support for setting various scheduling options for the cluster (tolerations, affinities, topology spread).
- Management of Qdrant collections, including configuration of replication, sharding, indexing, quantization, etc.
- The operator works in cluster mode with leader elections, ensuring high availability.
- The operator allows to create instant and scheduled snapshots and store them in any S3-compatible storage.

## 🎯 Design Philosophy

This operator is a **Kubernetes-native Qdrant database operator**, focused on lifecycle management using standard Kubernetes resources. It is designed to be:

- **Simple and predictable**: Uses standard Kubernetes patterns (StatefulSets, Services, PVCs)
- **Self-contained**: No external control-plane dependencies; everything runs within your cluster
- **Kubernetes-native**: Leverages K8s primitives and follows Kubernetes best practices
- **User-controlled**: Users configure resources, scheduling, and scaling; the operator applies the desired state

### How it differs from Qdrant Cloud Operator

The Qdrant Cloud Operator includes a SaaS control-plane with features like automatic shard rebalancing, billing, and SLA enforcement. This operator focuses on **database lifecycle management** within Kubernetes, leaving advanced orchestration to the user or external tools.

**Key differences**:

- **This operator**: Self-hosted, Kubernetes-native, full user control
- **Cloud Operator**: SaaS-managed, cloud control-plane, automated orchestration

For detailed scope and design decisions, see [SCOPE.md](docs/SCOPE.md).
For a feature-by-feature comparison, see [Comparison with Qdrant Cloud Operator](docs/comparison.md).

### 🔨 Installation

To run the operator you need Kubernetes version 1.26+.

The operator includes two custom resources - `QdrantCluster` and `QdrantCollection`. Install the CRDs by running the commands below:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/main/deploy/crds/crd-qdrantcluster.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/main/deploy/crds/crd-qdrantcollection.yaml
```

You will see the next output:

```console
customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/qdrantclusters.qdrant.operator created
customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/qdrantcollections.qdrant.operator created
```

Install the operator by running the command below:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/main/deploy/operator.yaml
```

```console
namespace/qdrant-operator created
serviceaccount/qdrant-operator-sa created
clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/qdrant-operator-role created
clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/qdrant-operator-rolebinding created
configmap/qdrant-operator-config created
deployment.apps/qdrant-operator created
```

Wait for operator's readiness:

```bash
kubectl wait pods -l app=qdrant-operator --for condition=Ready --timeout=300s -n qdrant-operator
```

And check operator's logs to ensure it is working:

```bash
kubectl logs deploy/qdrant-operator -n qdrant-operator
```

```console
Found 3 pods, using pod/qdrant-operator-6577f85799-ggkgm
1/14/2024, 3:58:40 PM: Debug mode ON!
1/14/2024, 3:58:40 PM: Status of "qdrant-operator-6577f85799-ggkgm": FOLLOWER. Trying to get leader status...
1/14/2024, 3:58:41 PM: Status of "qdrant-operator-6577f85799-ggkgm": LEADER.
1/14/2024, 3:58:41 PM: Watching QdrantClusters API.
1/14/2024, 3:58:41 PM: Watching QdrantCollections API.
```

### ⚡ Quickstart

Deploy your first Qdrant cluster by applying the minimal QdrantCluster custom resource:

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCluster
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 1
  image: qdrant/qdrant:v1.16.3
EOF
```

```console
qdrantcluster.qdrant.operator/my-cluster created
```

Check operator's logs to ensure cluster is running now:

```console
1/14/2024, 3:59:24 PM: Received event in phase ADDED.
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: The cluster "my-cluster" status now is Pending.
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: ConfigMap "my-cluster" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: ConfigMap "my-cluster" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: Service "my-cluster-headless" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:25 PM: Service "my-cluster-headless" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: Service "my-cluster" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: Service "my-cluster" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: StatefulSet "my-cluster" is not available. Creating...
1/14/2024, 3:59:26 PM: StatefulSet "my-cluster" was successfully created!
1/14/2024, 3:59:31 PM: Cluster "my-cluster" is not ready: 0/1 are available.
1/14/2024, 3:59:36 PM: Cluster "my-cluster" is not ready: 0/1 are available.
1/14/2024, 3:59:41 PM: Cluster "my-cluster" is ready!
1/14/2024, 3:59:41 PM: The cluster "my-cluster" status now is Running.
```

There are two mandatory parameters - `replicas` and `image`. You can check minimal and complete YAML manifests in the [examples](examples) folder.

By default there are no replication, resources, data persistence and scheduling options configured.

Now create your first vector [collection](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/concepts/collections/):

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCollection
metadata:
  name: my-collection
spec:
  cluster: my-cluster
  vectorSize: 10
EOF
```

```console
qdrantcollection.qdrant.operator/my-collection created
```

Check logs:

```console
1/14/2024, 4:01:43 PM: Received event in phase ADDED.
1/14/2024, 4:01:43 PM: Trying to create a Collection "my-collection" in the Cluster "my-cluster"...
1/14/2024, 4:01:44 PM: Status: ""ok"", time: "0.311443".
```

There are two mandatory parameters - `cluster` with the cluster reference and `vectorSize`. Minimal and complete manifests are also stored in the [examples](examples) folder.

By default disk storage is not configured and will use global cluster parameters, and shards number and replication factor are configured to `1` both.

### 🔒 Security

You can enable traffic encryption for client connections and between Qdrant nodes using the `spec.tls.enabled` option.
You can provide your own certificates (`spec.tls.secretName`) or use those generated by the operator.

```yaml
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCluster
...
spec:
  ...
  tls:
    enabled: true
    # secretName: your-certs-secret
```

Authentication is supported using API keys and read-only API keys. The parameters can be 'false', 'true' (operator generates keys), or 'your-own-custom-key'.

```yaml
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCluster
---
spec:
  apikey: 'true'
  readApikey: 'readoperationskey123'
```

### 💾 Backups

The operator allows you to create instant and scheduled snapshots of collections, storing data in S3 buckets (various cloud providers are supported).
Use the `spec.snapshots` option.

```yaml
apiVersion: qdrant.operator/v1alpha1
kind: QdrantCollection
...
spec:
  ...
  snapshots:
    s3EndpointURL: https://storage.googleapis.com/
    # s3EndpointURL: https://s3.amazonaws.com
    s3CredentialsSecretName: your-credentials-secret
    bucketName: your-bucket-for-snapshots
    # backupNow: true
    backupSchedule: "0 0 * * *"
    # restoreSnapshotName: clustername/collectionname/2024-01-01-23-59
```

Ensure to replace placeholders `your-credentials-secret` and `your-bucket-for-snapshots` with your actual secret name and bucket name.

### 🤖 Demo application

![demo](resources/demo2.gif)

Check the [demo-app](demo-app/README.md) folder to see a simple demo application that allows you to upload PDF documents to Qdrant and answer questions about the contents of the file.
The demo application does not rely on paid APIs from well-known services (such as Google Vertex AI or OpenAI).

### 📖 Documentation

**Design and Scope**:

- [Scope and Design Decisions](docs/SCOPE.md) - What this operator does and doesn't do, and why
- [Comparison with Qdrant Cloud Operator](docs/comparison.md) - Feature-by-feature comparison

**Guides**:

- [TLS usage](docs/tls.md)
- [Authentication](docs/authentication.md)
- [Cluster architecture](docs/architecture.md)
- [QdrantClusters API reference](docs/qdrantclusters-api.md)
- [QdrantCollections API reference](docs/qdrantcollections-api.md)
- [Backup and Restore](docs/backup-restore.md)

YAML examples:

- [Minimal Qdrant cluster](examples/qdrant-cluster-minimal.yaml)
- [Qdrant cluster with authentication](examples/qdrant-cluster-apikey.yaml)
- [Qdrant cluster with TLS](examples/qdrant-cluster-tls.yaml)
- [Complete Qdrant cluster](examples/qdrant-cluster-complete.yaml)
- [Minimal Qdrant collection](examples/qdrant-collection-minimal.yaml)
- [Qdrant collection with replication](examples/qdrant-collection-replication.yaml)
- [Qdrant collection with snapshots](examples/qdrant-collection-snapshot.yaml)
- [Complete Qdrant collection](examples/qdrant-collection-complete.yaml)

### ⭐ Give a Star!

Do you like this project? Support it by **giving a star**!

### ❓ Help and contribution.

If you encounter any issues while using Qdrant-operator, you can get help using [Github issues](https://github.com/ganochenkodg/qdrant-operator/issues).
If you want to help out with a code contribution, check the [Contribution guideline](./CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT](./LICENSE) license.

## Disclaimer of Warranty

Please note that the Qdrant operator currently is under development and new releases might contain bugs and breaking changes. The operator is not affiliated with [Qdrant](https://github.com/qdrant/).

This is based on https://github.com/robertveloso/qdrant-operator which was no longer updated
